Added custom array example with documentation. (#4169)
diesel-rs/diesel: examples/postgres/custom_arrays/README.md

```sql
-- Your SQL goes here

CREATE TYPE smdb.service_endpoint AS (
	"name" Text,
	"version" INTEGER,
	"base_uri" Text,
	"port" INTEGER,
	"protocol" smdb.protocol_type
);
```

Again, all custom types are prefixed with the custom schema.
And the matching drop operation in the down.sql file:

```sql
DROP TYPE IF EXISTS smdb.service_endpoint CASCADE;
DROP TYPE IF EXISTS smdb.protocol_type CASCADE;
DROP schema IF EXISTS smdb;
```

## Postgres SERIAL vs INTEGER primary key

There is an important detail you must decide upfront: Internal or External Primary key?

External primary key refers to the idea that you designate primary keys outside of Postgres.
Let’s think this through:

### Internal primary key: SERIAL type

When you only need a primary key as an index, you just use the SERIAL and Postgres gives your data an automatically
incrementing integer primary key.
You usually can return the primary key value after inserting so if you need to know the key, you do get it after insert.

### External primary key: INTEGER type

In case you need to know the specific value of the primary key and you need to know it before inserting the data, you

> have to assign unique primary keys before inserting data and you have to use the INTEGE type (or any of the many integer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have to assign unique primary keys before inserting data and you have to use the INTEGER type (or any of the many integer
```

the schema name.

The Diesel migration generates the following schema.rs file in the src root:

```rust
// @generated automatically by Diesel CLI.

pub mod smdb {
    pub mod sql_types {
        #[derive(diesel::query_builder::QueryId, Clone, diesel::sql_types::SqlType)]
        #[diesel(postgres_type(name = "service_endpoint", schema = "smdb"))]
        pub struct ServiceEndpoint;
    }

    diesel::table! {
        use diesel::sql_types::*;
        use super::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint;

        smdb.service (service_id) {
            service_id -> Int4,
            name -> Text,
            version -> Int4,
            online -> Bool,
            description -> Text,
            health_check_uri -> Text,
            base_uri -> Text,
            dependencies -> Array<Nullable<Int4>>,
            endpoints -> Array<Nullable<ServiceEndpoint>>,
        }
    }
}
```

Notice, the Postgres types are stored in Postgres therefore you are not seeing them in the generated schema. Only tables
will show up in the generates schema. Furthermore, you will need a wrapper struct to map from Rust to the Postgres type.

> For the ServiceEndpoint, Diesel already generated a matching wrapper struct with the correct annotations. The service
> table then uses that wrapper struct “ServiceEndpoint” instead of the native Postgres type to reference the custom type
> in the endpoints array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the ServiceEndpoint, Diesel already generated a matching zero sized SQL type struct with the correct annotations. The service
table then uses that SQL type `ServiceEndpoint` instead of the native Postgres type to reference the custom type
in the endpoints array.
```

You want to attach the generated schema.rs to your lib file to access it from within your crate and stop your IDE from
showing related warnings

Next, you want to create a folder model with a mod file in it attached to your lib file. This is your place to store all
Rust type implementations matching all the generated Postgres types and tables.

Lastly, you also want to add a type alias for a postgres database connection in the lib file because that gives you the
freedom to swap between a normal single connection or a connection pool without updating your type implementation or
tests.

> The connection pool type alias has ben uncommented, but the type signature of the pooled connection makes it obvious why

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection pool type alias has been uncommented, but the type signature of the pooled connection makes it obvious why
```

a type alias is a good idea.

At this point, your lib file looks as shown below:

```rust
mod schema;
pub mod model;

// Alias for a pooled connection.
// pub type Connection = diesel::r2d2::PooledConnection<diesel::r2d2::ConnectionManager<diesel::pg::PgConnection>>;

// Alias for a normal, single, connection.
pub type Connection = PgConnection;

```

## Rust Types

> In total, you implement three Rust types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In total, you need implement three Rust types:
```

* Enum: ProtocolType
* Struct: Endpoint
* Struct: Service

### Rust Enum: ProtocolType

> Diesel needs a wrapper struct to store a custom Enum in Postgres, so let’s add one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diesel needs a zero sized SQL type struct to represent a custom Enum in Postgres, so let’s add one:
```

```rust
#[derive(SqlType)]

> #[diesel(sql_type = protocol_type)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

as that's not needed

#[diesel(postgres_type(name = "protocol_type", schema = "smdb"))]
pub struct PgProtocolType;
```

> It is important that you add both, sql_type and postgres_type, otherwise insert will fail.
> Furthermore, it is important to add the database schema ("smdb") otherwise Postgres fails to find the type and aborts an
> operation on that type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to add the database schema ("smdb") and type name ("protocol_type") otherwise Postgres fails to find the type and aborts an
operation on that type.
```

> Next, let’s define the actual Enum. Bear in mind to use the wrapper struct as sql_type on the Enum:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let’s define the actual Enum. Bear in mind to use the SQL type struct as sql_type on the Enum:
```

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, FromSqlRow, AsExpression, PartialEq, Eq)]
#[diesel(sql_type = PgProtocolType)]
pub enum ProtocolType {
    UnknownProtocol,
    GRPC,
    HTTP,
    UDP,
}
```

It’s worth pointing out that you are dealing with three types in total:

1) protocol_type: The Postgres Enum type

> 2) PGProtocolType: The Wrapper struct that refers to the Postgres Enum type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) PgProtocolType: The SQL type struct that refers to the Postgres Enum type
```

> 3) ProtocolType: The Rust Enum that refers to the wrapper struct PGProtocolType

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3) ProtocolType: The Rust Enum that maps to the SQL type struct PgProtocolType
```

Mixing any of those three types will result in a complicated Diesel trait error. However, these error messages are just
a convoluted way to say that the database type mismatches the Rust type. When you encounter a consulted trait error
message, make sure to check:

> 1) Do I have a wrapper struct?
> 2) Does my a wrapper struct derives SqlType?
> 3) Does my wrapper type has both, sql_type and postgres_type declared?
> 4) Are sql_type and postgres_type both referring to the correct Postgres type?
> 5) Does my Rust type refers to the wrapper struct type?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) Do I have a SQL type struct?
2) Does my a SQL type struct derive SqlType?
3) Does my SQL type has a `#[diesel(postgres_type(_)]` attribute declared?
4) Is the  `#[diesel(postgres_type(_)]` attribute referring to the correct Postgres type?
5) Does my Rust type refers to the SQL type struct?
```

database backend (second generic argument).
It need to translate from the relevant wire protocol to the rust type.
For postgres/mysql enums that just means matching on the as ascii string,
but in general it's depended on the database + type.

```rust
impl FromSql<PgProtocolType, Pg> for ProtocolType {
    fn from_sql(bytes: PgValue<'_>) -> deserialize::Result<Self> {
        match bytes.as_bytes() {
            b"UnknownProtocol" => Ok(ProtocolType::UnknownProtocol),
            b"GRPC" => Ok(ProtocolType::GRPC),
            b"HTTP" => Ok(ProtocolType::HTTP),
            b"UDP" => Ok(ProtocolType::UDP),
            _ => Err(DatabaseError(
                DatabaseErrorKind::SerializationFailure,
                Box::new(format!(
                    "Unrecognized enum variant: {:?}",
                    String::from_utf8_lossy(bytes.as_bytes())
                )),
            )
            .into()),
        }
    }
}
```

In the from_sql, it is important to add error handling for unknown Enum variants
to catch errors that may result from incorrect database updates.

### Rust Struct Endpoint

```rust 
#[derive(Debug, Clone, FromSqlRow, AsExpression, PartialEq, Eq)]

> #[diesel(sql_type=crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[diesel(sql_type = crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint)]
```

pub struct Endpoint {
    pub name: String,
    pub version: i32,
    pub base_uri: String,
    pub port: i32,
    pub protocol: ProtocolType,
}
```

It is worth mentioning is that the sql_type refers to the sql side type generated by Diesel and stored in the schema.rs
file.
Keep this in mind if you ever refactor the schema.rs file into a different folder because the macro annotation checks
the path during compilation and throws an error if it cannot find the type in the provided path.
The serialize and deserialize implementation of a custom type is not as obvious as the Enum because, internally,
Postgres represent a custom type as an anonymous typed tuple. Therefore, you have to map a struct to a typed tuple and
back.

> Let’s start with the toSql implementation to store the Rust Endpoint struct as typed tuple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s start with the ToSql implementation to store the Rust Endpoint struct as typed tuple.
```

impl ToSql<crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint, Pg> for Endpoint {
    fn to_sql<'b>(&'b self, out: &mut Output<'b, '_, Pg>) -> serialize::Result {
        serialize::WriteTuple::<(Text, Integer, Text, Integer, PgProtocolType)>::write_tuple(
            &(
                self.name.to_owned(),
                self.version.to_owned(),
                self.base_uri.to_owned(),
                self.port.to_owned(),
                self.protocol.to_owned(),
            ),
            &mut out.reborrow(),
        )
    }
}
```

I cannot stress enough that it is paramount that the tuple type signature must match exactly the Postgres type signature
defined in your up.sql.
Ideally, you want to use the split view function in your IDE to have the up.sql in one pane and the the ToSql
implementation in another pane, both side by side, to double check
that the number and types match.
If the type or number of types mismatch, you will get a compiler error telling you that somehow either
the number of fields don’t match or that the type of the fields don’t match.
Also, because the write_tuple expects values, you have to call either to_owned() or clone() on any referenced data.

> The from_sql reverses the process by converting a Postgres typed tuple back into a Rust struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FromSql reverses the process by converting a Postgres typed tuple back into a Rust struct.
```

Again, Diesel provides a convenient helper to do so:

```rust 
impl FromSql<crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint, Pg> for Endpoint {
    fn from_sql(bytes: PgValue<'_>) -> deserialize::Result<Self> {
        let (name, version, base_uri, port, protocol) =
            FromSql::<Record<(Text, Integer, Text, Integer, PgProtocolType)>, Pg>::from_sql(bytes)?;

        Ok(Endpoint {
            name,
            version,
            base_uri,
            port,
            protocol,
        })
    }
}
```

Similar to the serialization process, it is paramount that the type annotation

> match exactly the one used in toSql and the type definition in up.sql.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
match exactly the one used in ToSql and the type definition in up.sql.
```

Debugging serialization issues in Diesel is relatively straight forward
since the compiler usually points out the location of the issue and, often, the issue is a type mismatch that is
relatively easy to fix.

It’s worth repeating that you are dealing with three types in total:

> 1) service_endpoint: The Postgres custom type
> 2) ServiceEndpoint: The wrapper struct generated by Diesel that refers to the Postgres type service_endpoint. Also, only
>    the wrapper struct carries the postgres_type annotation in addition to the an sql_type annotation.
> 3) Endpoint: The Rust struct with an sql_type annotation referring to the wrapper struct ServiceEndpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) service_endpoint: The Postgres custom type
2) ServiceEndpoint: The SQL type struct generated by Diesel that refers to the Postgres type service_endpoint. Also, only
   the SQL type struct carries the postgres_type annotation.
3) Endpoint: The Rust struct with an sql_type annotation referring to the SQL type struct ServiceEndpoint
```

operations need to be corrected to match the new type definition.

The requirements stated we want CRUD operations, and type-based programming suggest creating a different type per
operation. Because we use external primary keys, we don’t need an additional type for the delete operation, therefore,
in total, we crate 3 service types:

1) Service: For Read
2) CreateService: For create operations
3) UpdateService: For update operations

The Service and CreateService have identical fields.
Also, both types require a primary key annotation in addition to
the table name. For more details about inserts, refer to the
official [all about inserts guide](https://diesel.rs/guides/all-about-inserts.html).

The UpdateService, however, has each field wrapped into an option type. When the option type is Some, Diesel knows that
this field needs updating. If the field is set to None, Diesel ignores it.
For more details about updates, refer to the
official [all about updates guide](https://diesel.rs/guides/all-about-updates.html)

The relevant type declarations are:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Queryable, Selectable)]

> #[diesel(table_name= crate::schema::smdb::service,  primary_key(service_id))]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[diesel(table_name = crate::schema::smdb::service, primary_key(service_id))]
```

pub struct Service {
    pub service_id: i32,
    pub name: String,
    pub version: i32,
    pub online: bool,
    pub description: String,
    pub health_check_uri: String,
    pub base_uri: String,
    pub dependencies: Vec<Option<i32>>,
    pub endpoints: Vec<Option<Endpoint>>,
}

#[derive(Debug, Clone, Queryable, Insertable)]

> #[diesel(table_name= crate::schema::smdb::service,  primary_key(service_id))]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[diesel(table_name = crate::schema::smdb::service, primary_key(service_id))]
```

pub struct CreateService {
    pub service_id: i32,
    // ... skipped
    pub endpoints: Vec<Option<Endpoint>>,
}

#[derive(Debug, Clone, Queryable, Insertable, AsChangeset)]

> #[diesel(table_name= crate::schema::smdb::service)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[diesel(table_name = crate::schema::smdb::service)]
```

a service actually is in the database. Imagine, you want to test if you can deploy a new service with, say 5
dependencies, and somehow the database returns no, you can’t. The obvious question is why? There might be some services
that are offline, fair enough, just start them, but it might also be possible that somehow a service isn’t currently in
the database and that is where you need another check method.

Then, we want another method that takes a collection of service ID’s, checks all of them and returns either true if all
services are online, or returns an error message that states which service is offline.

Finally, let’s add another method that returns all services that are online and another one that
returns all services that are currently offline. The latter is handy to quickly identify a deployment blocker.

### Set Service Online / Offline

Let’s start with a private helper method that sets the Boolean online flag on a service in the database.

```rust 
    fn set_svc_online(
        db: &mut Connection,
        param_service_id: i32,
        param_online: bool,
    ) -> QueryResult<()> {

>         match diesel::update(service.filter(service_id.eq(param_service_id)))
>             .set(online.eq(param_online))
>             .returning(Service::as_returning())
>             .get_result(db)
>         {
>             Ok(_) => Ok(()),
>             Err(e) => Err(e),
>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        diesel::update(service.filter(service_id.eq(param_service_id)))
            .set(online.eq(param_online))
            .execute(db)?;
        Ok(())
```

also a risk of the return value being interpreted as the operation having succeeded. And that matters, because if you
set the flag to false, the same method return false, which is also correct, but could be misunderstood as the operation
didn’t completed because false was returned. A good API is mostly free of ambiguity and therefore, therefore you just
return Ok(()) in case of success because there is no way to misunderstand a returned ok.

Now, let’s add two public wrapper methods that set the flag to either true or false.

```rust 
    pub fn set_service_online(db: &mut Connection, param_service_id: i32) -> QueryResult<()> {
        Self::set_svc_online(db, param_service_id, true)
    }

    pub fn set_service_offline(db: &mut Connection, param_service_id: i32) -> QueryResult<()> {
        Self::set_svc_online(db, param_service_id, false)
    }
```

### Check Service Exists

Next up, we add a method to check if service is in the database and the easiest way to implement this is to test if find
returns a result or error.

```rust
    pub fn check_if_service_id_exists(
        db: &mut Connection,
        param_service_id: i32,
    ) -> QueryResult<bool> {

>         match service.find(param_service_id).first::<Service>(db) {
>             Ok(_) => Ok(true),
>             Err(_) => Ok(false),
>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Ok(service.find(param_service_id).first::<Service>(db).optional()?.is_some())
```

    }
```

### Check Service Online

To check if a service is online, we again lean on the generated DSL:

```rust
    pub fn check_if_service_id_exists(
        db: &mut Connection,
        param_service_id: i32,
    ) -> QueryResult<bool> {
        match service.find(param_service_id).first::<Service>(db) {
            Ok(_) => Ok(true),
            Err(_) => Ok(false),
        }

>     }

Reviewer: That seems to be copy + pasted from above. We should likely use the correct function from the example here

    }
```

As an observation, when we replace the filter criterion with a test if a service is online, we get all services with
online set to true and that is very easy to implement:

### Get All Online Services

```rust
    pub fn get_all_online_services(db: &mut Connection) -> QueryResult<Vec<Self>> {
        service
            .filter(online.eq(true))
            .select(Service::as_returning())
            .load::<Service>(db)
    }
```

### Get All Offline Services

Likewise, we use the same filter to
find and return all services with online set to false.

```rust
    pub fn get_all_offline_services(db: &mut Connection) -> QueryResult<Vec<Self>> {
        service
            .filter(online.eq(false))
            .select(Service::as_returning())
            .load::<Service>(db)
    }
```

### Check All Services Online

Finally, we can implement the last method that takes a collection of service ID’s, checks all of them, and returns
either true, or the service ID that is offline.

```rust
    pub fn check_all_services_online(
        db: &mut Connection,
        services: &[i32],
    ) -> QueryResult<(bool, Option<String>)> {
        for id in services {

>             match Service::check_if_service_id_online(db, *id) {
>                 Ok(res) => {
>                     if !res {
>                         return Ok((false, Some(format!("Service {} is offline", id))));
>                     }
>                 }
>                 Err(e) => return Err(e),
>             };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            let res = Service::check_if_service_id_online(db, *id)?;
            if !res {
                return Ok((false, Some(format!("Service {} is offline", id))));
            }
```

Author: That is from check_all_services_online; I've replaced the sample in the Readme with the actual implementation.
Good catch.

parameter,
you just don't know if the component that created the connection has checked the connection, therefore you better check
it to catch a dead connection.
Second, even if you have a correct database connection, this does not guarantee that the migration will succeed.
There might be some types left from a previously aborted drop operations or
a random error might happened at any stage of the migration, therefore you have to handle the error where it occurs.
Also, because you run the db migration during application startup or before testing,
ensure you have clear error messages to speed up diagnostic and debugging.

### DB Integration Tests

Database integration tests become flaky when executed in parallel usually because of conflicting read / write
operations.
While modern database systems can handle concurrent data access, test tools with assertions not so much.
That means, test assertions start to fail seemingly randomly when executed concurrently.
There are only very few viable options to deal with this reality:

* Don't use parallel test execution
* Only parallelize test per isolated access

> * Do synchronization and test the actual database state before each test and run tests as atomic transactions

Reviewer: There is a simple trick here that enables you to write concurrent database tests: Use a dangling transaction. Diesel uses that extensively for it's own test-suite. What that means is that you perform the following steps:

* Open a new connection per test
* Directly start a new transaction (Diesel provides the `Connection::begin_test_transaction` function for this)
* Perform any test code (including schema setup for postgres)
* Rollback the transaction

With that you end up with mostly isolated views on the database, where each test does not see the changes from other tests. (Well you can observe different id's etc, but that's all)

Author: Okay, I actually added another testsuite to the example that implements the parallel testing via begin_test_transaction. That way, people have the freedom to adopt either the test group parallel test style or the per test transaction testing style.

Very good point, I've updated the Readme.

## Postgres schema

Since the service management operates independently from the rest of the system, it is sensible to store all data in a
dedicated schema. A schema in Postgres is like a namespace as it ensures unique table and type names within the schema.
More importantly, you can create a new user that specifically has access to only a particular schema and that is always
a good security practice. To create a new schema with Diesel, you follow three steps:

1) Declare the schema name in the diesel.toml file
2) Declare the schema in the migration up/down.sql files
3) Prefix all table names in the migration up/down.sql files with the schema

Postgres uses internally a schema as something like a search path for a table and, by default, 
searches in the public schema for a table. If that fails, Postgres returns an error that the table does not exists (in the default schema).
Because of the search path mechanism, you only have to declare the schema name and consistently prefix thetables in the schema with the schema name and that’s it.

It is important to know that a custom schema only applies to tables. Custom types and enum still

> reside in the default public schema. 

Author: Ok. I worked on this but got a bunch or errors so i removed parts.
It seems to be working now after having correctly annotated the wrapper types with the schema.
Updating the Readmen to reflect that.

The company only uses three types of API endpoints, gRPC, http, or UDP. However, because data entry or transmission
errors happen, an UnknownProtocol has been added to catch everything else that may go wrong to ensure no serialization /
deserialization bugs crash the system. Instead, every once a while a Chron job runs over the database and searches for
those UnknownProtocol entries, reports it to the admin who may fixes the incorrect entries one day. Therefore the
Postgres ENUM in your up.sql looks like this:

```sql
-- Your SQL goes here
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS smdb;

CREATE TYPE protocol_type AS ENUM (
    'UnknownProtocol',
    'GRPC',
    'HTTP',
    'UDP'
);
```

Add the corresponding drop type operation to your down.sql file:

```sql
DROP TYPE IF EXISTS protocol_type CASCADE;
DROP schema IF EXISTS smdb;
```

## Postgres custom type

The service endpoint in this case is modelled as a custom type.
There are few cases when you want to choose a custom type over a table.

1) The data have no relation to data in other tables
2) You want to group a bunch of fields i.e. to store a configuration file with nested fields
3) You specifically don’t want to model relations

> In the case of a service endpoint, it really is as simple as every service has one or more endpoints, but these are

Author: Done.

	"name" Text NOT NULL,
	"version" INTEGER NOT NULL,
	"online" BOOLEAN NOT NULL,
	"description" Text NOT NULL,
	"health_check_uri" Text NOT NULL,
	"base_uri" Text NOT NULL,
	"dependencies" INTEGER[] NOT NULL,
	"endpoints" service_endpoint[] NOT NULL
);
```

As mentioned earlier, the custom schema applies to tables therefore the service table is
prefixed with the schema name whereas the endpoint type is not as it resides in the public schema. 

Add the matching drop statement to your down.sql file:

```sql
-- This file should undo anything in `up.sql`
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS smdb.service;
DROP TYPE IF EXISTS service_endpoint CASCADE;
DROP TYPE IF EXISTS protocol_type CASCADE;
DROP schema IF EXISTS smdb;
```

A few notes on the service table:

* Notice the schema prefix appears only in the table name.
* The custom type and custom Enum do not have any prefix because they are in the default schema.
* The array type follows the usual convention type[].
* The NOT NULL attribute means that the array itself must be set; Values inside the array still might be null.

The Diesel team decided that array values are nullable by default because there so many things that may go wrong when

> dealing with array values thus making them nullable by default prevents a few potential crashes. Conversely, it also

Author: Correct. Fixing it.

means you have to unwrap option types whenever you access data deserialized from an array.

In total, the up.sql looks as below:

```sql
-- Your SQL goes here
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS smdb;

CREATE TYPE protocol_type AS ENUM (
    'UnknownProtocol',
    'GRPC',
    'HTTP',
    'UDP'
);

CREATE TYPE service_endpoint AS (
	"name" Text,
	"version" INTEGER,
	"base_uri" Text,
	"port" INTEGER,
	"protocol" protocol_type
);

CREATE TABLE  smdb.service(
	"service_id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	"name" Text NOT NULL,
	"version" INTEGER NOT NULL,
	"online" BOOLEAN NOT NULL,
	"description" Text NOT NULL,
	"health_check_uri" Text NOT NULL,
	"base_uri" Text NOT NULL,
	"dependencies" INTEGER[] NOT NULL,
	"endpoints" service_endpoint[] NOT NULL
);
```

Now, it’s time to run the Diesel migration:

```bash 
diesel migration run
```

This generates a schema.rs file in the src root:

```rust
// @generated automatically by Diesel CLI.

pub mod smdb {
    pub mod sql_types {
        #[derive(diesel::query_builder::QueryId, Clone, diesel::sql_types::SqlType)]

>         #[diesel(postgres_type(name = "service_endpoint", schema = "smdb"))]

Author: True. As mentioned before, I've removed stuff so this is a left-ofter.
That said, this commented really helped me to understand that I have to annotated all wrapper types with the custom schema and then stuff worked.

#[diesel(sql_type = PgProtocolType)]
pub enum ProtocolType {
    UnknownProtocol,
    GRPC,
    HTTP,
    UDP,
}
```

It’s worth pointing out that you are dealing with three types in total:

1) protocol_type: The Postgres Enum type
2) PGProtocolType: The Wrapper struct that refers to the Postgres Enum type
3) ProtocolType: The Rust Enum that refers to the wrapper struct PGProtocolType

Mixing any of those three types will result in a complicated Diesel trait error. However, these error messages are just
a convoluted way to say that the database type mismatches the Rust type. When you encounter a consulted trait error
message, make sure to check:

1) Do I have a wrapper struct?
2) Does my a wrapper struct derives SqlType?
3) Does my wrapper type has both, sql_type and postgres_type declared?
4) Are sql_type and postgres_type both referring to the correct Postgres type?
5) Does my Rust type refers to the wrapper struct type?

If all those checks pass and you still see errors, it’s most likely a serialization error.

To serialize and deserialize a custom Enum, you write a custom toSql and fromSql implementation. Luckily, this is
straightforward.

> 

Reviewer: I personally would like to add a paragraph here that explains what these impl do.

`ToSql` describes how to serialize a given rust type (`Self`) as sql side type (first generic argument) for a specific database backend (second generic argument). It needs to translate the type into the relevant wire protocol in that case. For postgres/mysql enums that's just the enum value as ascii string, but in general it's depended on the database + type.

`FromSql` describes how to deserialize a given rust type (`Self`) as sql side type (first generic argument) for a specific database backend (second generic argument). It need to translate from the relevant wire protocol to the rust type. For postgres/mysql enums that just means matching on the as ascii string, but in general it's depended on the database + type.

Author: That is a great explanation. I added it as it is to the Custom enum paragraph.

            ProtocolType::UDP => out.write_all(b"UDP")?,
        }
        Ok(IsNull::No)
    }
}

impl FromSql<PgProtocolType, Pg> for ProtocolType {
    fn from_sql(bytes: PgValue<'_>) -> deserialize::Result<Self> {
        match bytes.as_bytes() {
            b"UnknownProtocol" => Ok(ProtocolType::UnknownProtocol),
            b"GRPC" => Ok(ProtocolType::GRPC),
            b"HTTP" => Ok(ProtocolType::HTTP),
            b"UDP" => Ok(ProtocolType::UDP),
            _ => Ok(ProtocolType::UnknownProtocol),
        }
    }
}
```

In toSql, it is important to end the implementation with Ok(IsNull::No). In the from_sql, it is important to add a catch
all case that returns an UnknownProtocol instance. In practice, the catch all rarely ever gets triggered, but in those
few corner cases when it does, it keeps the application running.

### Rust Struct Endpoint

```rust 
#[derive(Debug, Clone, FromSqlRow, AsExpression, PartialEq, Eq)]
#[diesel(sql_type=crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint)]
pub struct Endpoint {
    pub name: String,
    pub version: i32,
    pub base_uri: String,
    pub port: i32,
    pub protocol: ProtocolType,
}
```

> It is worth mentioning is that the sql_type refers to the wrapper struct generated by Diesel and stored in the schema.rs

Reviewer: > wrapper struct

We call that type sql side type in our documentation. (At least we try to be consistent)

Author: Good to know

file. Keep this in mind if you ever refactor the schema.rs file into a different folder because the macro annotation
checks the path during compilation and throws an error if it cannot find the type in the provided path. The serialize
and deserialize implementation of a custom type is not as obvious as the Enum because, internally, Postgres represent a
custom type as an anonymous typed tuple. Therefore, you have to map a struct to a typed tuple and back.

Let’s start with the toSql implementation to store the Rust Endpoint struct as typed tuple. Luckily, Diesel provides a
helper util to do just that.

```rust 
impl ToSql<crate::schema::smdb::sql_types::ServiceEndpoint, Pg> for Endpoint {
    fn to_sql<'b>(&'b self, out: &mut Output<'b, '_, Pg>) -> serialize::Result {
        serialize::WriteTuple::<(Text, Integer, Text, Integer, PgProtocolType)>::write_tuple(
            &(
                self.name.to_owned(),
                self.version.to_owned(),
                self.base_uri.to_owned(),
                self.port.to_owned(),
                self.protocol.to_owned(),
            ),
            &mut out.reborrow(),
        )
    }
}
```

> I cannot stress enough that it is paramount that the tuple type signature must match exactly the Postgres type signature defined in your up.sql. Ideally, you want to use the split view function in your IDE to have the up.sql 

Reviewer: Note for diesel-team/myself: We might want to look into generating that as part of the `schema.rs` file as well. Maybe just as `impl RecordLike { type Fields = (…)}` for record types and maybe for enums `impl EnumLike { const FIELDS: &str = &[…] }` 

(That would likely also result in diesel-cli generating the relevant SQL type for the enum here as well)

To be clear: That's nothing that you need to address as this PR, that's just me thinking loud.

> in one pane and the the toSql implementation in another pane, both side by side, to double check 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in one pane and the the ToSql implementation in another pane, both side by side, to double check 
```

that the number and types match. 
If the type or number of types mismatch, you will get a compiler error telling you that somehow either 
the number of fields don’t match or that the type of the fields don’t match. 

> Also, because the write_tuple expects values, you have to call either to_owned() or clone() on any referenced data.

Reviewer: I think it should work with `&self.version`, etc as well, but I've not checked that (as of writing this comment)

therefore it makes sense to implement the operations on the type itself. 
This also hides implementation details in encapsulation,
as [discussed in the book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch17-01-what-is-oo.html#encapsulation-that-hides-implementation-details).

Second, you gain a single point of maintenance because, in case your table definition changes, you have to update the
Rust type anyways and because Diesel is statically checked, the compiler will immediately point out where your
operations need to be corrected to match the new type definition.

The requirements stated we want CRUD operations, and type-based programming suggest creating a different type per
operation. Because we use external primary keys, we don’t need an additional type for the delete operation, therefore,
in total, we crate 3 service types:

1) Service: For Read
2) CreateService: For create operations
3) UpdateService: For update operations

The Service and CreateService have identical fields. Also, both types require a primary key annotation in addition to
the table name. The UpdateService, however, has each field wrapped into an option type. When the option type is Some,

> Diesel knows that this field needs updating. If the field is set to None, Diesel ignores it.

Reviewer: It might be worth to link the "All about inserts/updates" guides here for the relevant parts?

Author: Done.

annotation you get a compile error. If you have the type annotation in place, you can add more operations whenever you
want and things compile right away.
To illustrate the last point, the count operator in Postgres only returns an i64 integer. Suppose your application
expects an u64 from the persistence API. Wouldn’t it be nice to make the conversion on the fly?

Let’s take a closer look. Conventionally, you write the count operation like so:

```rust
  pub fn count(db: &mut Connection) -> QueryResult<i64> {
        service.count().get_result::<i64>(db)
    }
```

Notice, the get result has a type annotation for i64. If you remove it, the code still compiles. But leave it there for
a moment. Let’s add a map operation that takes an i64 returned from the count query and converts it into an u64. Notice,
we have to update the return type of the method as well.

```rust
   pub fn count_u64(db: &mut Connection) -> QueryResult<u64> {
        service.count()
        .get_result::<i64>(db)
        .map(|c| c as u64)
    }
```

Run the compile and see that it works. Now, if you were to remove the type annotation <i64> from get_result, you get a

> compile error saying that trait FromSql is not implemented.

Reviewer: Just to add a bit more context here: That's sometimes requires because there can be more than one `FromSql` impl for the same rust type and there can be more than one `FromSql` type for the same sql type. That gives a lot flexibility how you actually map data between your database and your rust code, but it requires that you be explicit about these types.
